Microsoft describes Azure AI search as designed to scale to any workload involving retrieval augmented generation. With it, you can create a vector database prepared from enterprise data, and know that your information is secure, compliant with regulators, and is built around responsible AI practices.
If you're working with outdated information sources, it can be useful to know that Azure AI Search used to be called Azure Cognitive Search. It provides access to uploaded data, as well as generative AI search, in a way that isn't limited by how many users can use your application. Searching for information is the basis of all apps that provide text output, or vectorized information.
Typically, applications are built to look through unstructured documents like spreadsheets and PDFs, or structured data like you'd find in a well-normalized SQL databse.
With the advent of large language models, the technique of retrieval augmented generation centers around providing information from traditional data sources to create effective prompts, providing a foundation for conversational interaction.
Creating a search service can involve working with vector searches, searches that match full text, as well as hybrid approaches. It involves indexing data with vectorization and chunking, but also text analysis that breaks human language into its basic buidling blocks, like nouns and verbs. Also, there is support for autocomplete, search based on spatial information, as well as options for fuzzy searches and complex options for specifying the parameters of search for text, vector, and hybrid models.
A search service with Azure exists as an intermediate layer between un-indexed raw information in your organization and an app you build to take user inputs and provide useful output via an index.
You build your search app based on APIs that work with all kinds of techniques for data analysis, including matching patterns, sorting, tuning results for relevance, and ranking of results based on inferred meaning rather than verbatim matches.
Azure AI Search has the benefit of interconnecting with other services using indexers and skillsets. An indexer helps you ingest information from Azure data sources. Skillsets are things that are AI based, like searches based on images, or custom creations from Azure Machine Learning.
Inside the search service, the main purpose is to provide indexing and querying capabilites.
Indexing is a process by which you provide content for your service and make it easily searchable. Text input is broken down into inverted indexes (information is organized numerically based on where words are located in the data, rather than what data contains what words - that way a search system can find all the places where a word is located without having to search every line of text in the system). Vectors can also be provided as input, and are stored in an efficient easily-machine-searchable format. Azure can index information uploaded in JSON format, but can also use an indexer to convert your data into that format. Indexing can be extended to images, using techniques like optical character recognition or image descriptions. As for large documents containing entirely human-readable information, those can be translated between languages, or have information extracted about its organization.
Querying is the opposite - getting useful information out of your data. Once an index has searchable information added to it, your app can take questions from your users and provide responses back. If you use semantic ranking, you can use the underlying meaning of initial search results to determine the most useful information to provide back to users.
Microsoft's Azure AI Search is useful for searching raw text, as well as generating vector similarity results, providing a balanced set of capabilities for optimal search effectiveness. It's also good at combining different types of information into a search system based on structured text and vectors. All this is possible while maintaing strict control over how your organization's information is used.

# Comparison to LangChain
TODO: NOT READY BEFORE LANGCHAIN LESSONS COMPLETED

The basic steps of setting up a search index are creating it, loading it with data, and searching it. First, you create a search (we'll be using the Python API), providing a way to organize the information you want to search. Then, you move your data into Azure by uploading JSON (alternatively, you can have Azure download your information from many Microsoft data storage solutions). Last, you perform searches against your service (again, we will be doing this in Python).

Setting up a basic data index is pretty simple. After making sure you have the dependencies for Azure installed and endpoints determined, you need to create an AzureKeyCredential from your search api key. Then you need to make sure you're importing the right things from the Azure dependencies installed with PIP for the rest of the script to work.
Then comes creation of the SearchIndexClient. This is based on the endpoint and the AzureKeyCredential created. Fields for the index are set up next, comprised of name-type pairs describing the fields your information will be organized into, and the types of information represented.
The next step is creating a SearchIndex from a name, the fields prepared in the prior step, a suggestor (built with a name and some source fields), and an array of scoring progfiles (empty for our purposes). After the SearchIndex is created, it is created on the server side.
For our demo, the next stage is building an array of JSON objects containing the data organized into the fields you set out in the SearchIndexClient. This is uploaded to a SearchClient (comprised of the endpoint for search, the name of the index, and the AzureKeyCredential).
To run an empty search, you can provide a kleen star for matching "any" search text with the simple query type and fields to show in the results. It should show all the documents in the index.
To run a search with a keyword, set search_text to your word, and perform the search again.
This isn't too impressive, but it shows you the very basics to get started.
